knative function integration proposal (#314)
kyma-project/community: sig-and-wg/sig-core/proposals/knative_function_integration.md

# Integration of the knative based function controller

## Introduction

One of the main features of kyma is its ability to run serverless functions. Currently the functions provider in Kyma is the open source project [kubeless](https://github.com/kubeless/kubeless). With the focus shift towards knative, Kubeless will be replaced with a functions runtime controller (called `function-controller` from here on) that is the provider of a [Knative](https://github.com/knative) based functions (called `knative-functions` from here on).

The migration to a new functions provider should provide a similar user experience as with the currently available kubeless runtime. This includes UI based CRUD operations for the functions as well as monitoring, alerting and  backup / restore.

## Features

### Current Features

> - As a developer, I want to provide my code as a function of a certain language and runtime to be deployed.

Reviewer: We have got only node6 and node8. Should we mention that ? `certain language` is generic imo

Reviewer 2: this is the generic description of the feature, regardless of what are the currently supported runtimes. We can add in the proposal that we only support 2 runtimes.

- As a developer, I want to specify the packages/library dependencies of my code so that it's available for my code.
- As a developer, I want to be able to provide arbitrary environment variables as name, value pairs to be available for use inside my function.
- As a developer, I want to create a `Service Binding` to a `Service Instance` that is provisioned inside my namespace.
- As a developer, I want to expose my function via `http` & `https` with the option to add a token based authentication.

> - As a developer, I want to be able to choose different runtimes for my function.

Reviewer: hmm there are two runtimes node6 and node8.
Also you forgot trigger lambdas via events :)

### New Features

- As a developer, I want to define enable and disable scale to zero as well as specify the scale to zero grace period.

> - As a developer, I want to view the status of my function.

Reviewer: serving provides several more options like traffic splitting, we would like that in future should we add that here ?

Reviewer 2: yeah I thought about them but for now I would like to start with the basic serving specific features from the UI. Then we can add gradually.

## Proposed Solution

### Overview
We are proposing introducing the following changes:

1. A new `Function` CRD and `function-controller` component.
2. Bundle [Tekton Pipelines](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/) and [Knative Serving](https://github.com/knative/serving) as Kyma modules.
3. Bundle a docker registry inside Kyma for hosting function images.
4. Adding GraphQL layer support.
5. Updating the UI with a new Microfrontend Functions section that leverages all new functionality.

### Function CRD

#### CRD Definition

The new `Function` CRD gives the user a way to define how to turn his source code into a running container inside Kyma. That source code is conventionally a single function running inside a specific execution environment (aka runtime). This is an example of the minimum set of fields you need to successfully define your function.

```YAML

> apiVersion: functions.serverless.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1

Reviewer: `serverless.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1` ?

Reviewer 2: I copy pasted it from the code, but yeah I like that more.

kind: Function
metadata:
  name: sample
  labels:
    foo: bar
spec:
  function: |
    module.exports = {
        main: function(event, context) {
          return 'Hello World'
        }
      }
  functionContentType: "plaintext"
  size: "L"
  runtime: "nodejs8"
```

[Appendix A](#appendix-a-function-custom-resource-definition) has the full definition of the function CRD.

#### Function Controller

The function controller reconciles `Function` objects by using `Tekton` and `Knative Serving` to do the following:

1. Create a `TaskRun` object for the proper `Task` based on the provided runtime in the `Function Object`.
2. Create a `Knative Service` object that refers to the newly published image created in the previous step.

The following diagram gives a brief overview of the sequence of events. The
only thing the user does is create a function object.

> ![function controller](assets/knative_function_controller.svg) .

Reviewer: please check if the link works

### Tekton Pipelines and Knative Serving

`Tekton Pipelines` and `Knative Serving` will be bundled with Kyma as Kyma modules. They will be installed by default once the knative-functions provider completely replaces Kubeless.

### Docker Registry module

> [Docker Registry](https://hub.docker.com/_/registry) will be bundled as a Kyma module that is used to host and serve the docker images generated by building functions. It will be configurable to use the Minio in Kyma for storage. It'll also be configurable so that Kyma

Reviewer: I am still not sure networks around here :)

users can skip installing it and provide an external registry instead.

### GraphQL layer support

For the user to have a fully functional and integrated function from the UI, CRUD operations for the following four
objects needs to be supported in the GraphQL API layer.

* Function
* ServiceBinding
* ServiceBindingUsage
* API  

> 

Reviewer: Also events. I think we have implementation in graphql for events, servicebinding and servicebindingusage  and api only functions is missing

> #### Function GraphQL Objects Spec

Reviewer: I am not sure how this would be done. Since we would additionally need to pass `api`, `events` and `servicebinding` info

Reviewer 2: so my understanding from @k15r is that these are the "missing" objects, so api, service binding, events etc all have existing objects. it will be several objects.

```json
type Function {
  name: String!
  functionCode: String!
  size: FunctionSize
  runtime: FunctionRuntime
  dependencies: String
  environment: [EnvironmentVariable]
  timeout: Int
  status: FunctionStatus!
}

type FunctionSize {
  name: String!
  description: String!
}

type FunctionRuntime {
  name: String!
  description: String!
}

type FunctionStatus {
  type: FunctionStatusType!
  message: String
}

type EnvironmentVariable {
  name: String!
  value: String!
}
```

### New UI Functions Microfrontend

Even though the kubeless function crd and the knative-functions crd look very similar some changes to the UI layer are
required to fully leverage the new approach and new functionality.

The UI for knative-functions should be implemented as a new micro frontend. This will allow us to enable the old and the new UI at the same time and keep the code clean. A feature flag will be used to enable the new UI.

#### Function Creation Flow

The following diagram summarizes the objections creation flow that needs to be done via the GraphQL API client on behalf
of the user to have a fully functional and integrated `Function`. 

> ![Creation flow](assets/knative_function_workflow.svg)

Reviewer: please check if the link works

# Integration of the Knative-based function controller

## Introduction

One of the main features of Kyma is its ability to run serverless functions. Currently, the open-source project [Kubeless](https://github.com/kubeless/kubeless) is the functions provider in Kyma. However, the focus shift towards Knative assumes replacing Kubeless with a functions runtime controller (function-controller). This function controller provides [Knative](https://github.com/knative)-based functions (knative-functions).

The migration to a new functions provider should ensure a similar user experience as the currently available Kubeless runtime does. This includes UI based CRUD operations for the functions, as well as monitoring, alerting, and backup and restore.

## Features

### Current Features

> - As a developer, I want to provide my code as a function of a certain language and runtime to be deployed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- As a developer, I want to provide my code as a function written in a certain language and using a certain runtime for deployment.
```

- As a developer, I want to specify the packages and library dependencies available for my code.
- As a developer, I want to be able to provide arbitrary environment variables, such as name or value pairs to use them inside my function.
- As a developer, I want to create a Service Binding to a Service Instance provisioned in my Namespace.
- As a developer, I want to configure my function so that it can be triggered by an Event coming from an application bound to my Namespace.
- As a developer, I want to expose my function via HTTP and HTTPS with the option to add a token-based authentication.
- As a developer, I want to be able to choose different runtimes for my function.

### New features

> - As a developer, I want to debug my functions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- As a developer, I want to debug my functions.
```

> # Integration of the knative based function controller

Reviewer: fixed.

## Introduction

One of the main features of kyma is its ability to run serverless functions. Currently the functions provider in Kyma is the open source project [kubeless](https://github.com/kubeless/kubeless). With the focus shift towards knative, Kubeless will be replaced with a functions runtime controller (called `function-controller` from here on) that is the provider of a [Knative](https://github.com/knative) based functions (called `knative-functions` from here on).

The migration to a new functions provider should provide a similar user experience as with the currently available kubeless runtime. This includes UI based CRUD operations for the functions as well as monitoring, alerting and  backup / restore.

## Features

### Current Features

> - As a developer, I want to provide my code as a function of a certain language and runtime to be deployed.

Reviewer: The statement here is meant to be a generic one. So what is meant here is function is written in nodejs and deployed inside node runtime. But we dont want to have concrete terms here so `certain language and runtime`

> - As a developer, I want to provide my code as a function of a certain language and runtime to be deployed.

Reviewer 3: Ok, got it :)

### Service Catalog

In order to support ServiceBindings on the new objects we need to create a UsageKind that supports knative-functions.

```yaml
apiVersion: servicecatalog.kyma-project.io/v1alpha1
kind: UsageKind
metadata:
  annotations:
  finalizers:
  - servicecatalog.kyma-project.io/usage-kind-protection
  name: ksvc
spec:
  displayName: KSVC
  labelsPath: spec.template.metadata.labels
  resource:
    group: serving.knative.dev
    kind: Service
    version: v1alpha1
```

The problem that needs to be solved here is that as soon as the service binding controller modifies the knative-service knative-serving creates a new revision and automatically starts a new pod with the updated configuration. The PodPreset also does this creates a new pod based on the old configuration plus the updated PodPreset. So until knative-serving scales down the service the pods are duplicated.

## Challenges

### Multiple Functions Provider

Currently kubeless is installed by default as a core component into every kyma installation. Technically it is easily possible to install the `function-controller` in parallel with kubeless.

#### Single Functions Provider - Modularize Kubeless

> Installing only one of the runtimes requires changes in the current installation approach for kubeless. Kubeless is currently not a separate module. This means its installation cannot be disabled at the moment. Moving kubeless to its own module is a major task. Due to the fact that the use of kubeless will be discontinued we advise against this solution.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Installing only one of the runtimes requires changes in the current installation approach for Kubeless. Kubeless is currently not a separate module. This means its installation cannot be disabled at the moment. Moving Kubeless to its own module is a major task. Due to the fact that the use of Kubeless will be discontinued, we advise against this solution.
```

##### Pros

- No unused system resources due to unused controllers.

> - Only one function implementation will be active per cluster.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Only one function implementation active per cluster.
```

##### Cons

- Kubeless has to be converted into an optional module.
- No way to try out the new `function-controller` while still having Kubeless functions as the production ready functions provider.

> #### Single Functions Provider - Feature Flag

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Single functions provider - feature flag
```

> Another approach to have only one active runtime could be a feature-flag that allows the selection of the functions provider during installation/upgrade of kyma.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another approach to have only one active runtime could be a feature-flag that allows the selection of the functions provider during Kyma installation or upgrade.
```

##### Pros

- Installation is easier to implement.
- No unused system resources due to unused controllers.
- Only one function implementation will be active per cluster.

##### Cons

- No way to try out the new `function-controller` while still having Kubeless functions as the production ready functions provider.

> #### Both Functions Provider

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#### Both functions providers
```

> It is also possible to install both function providers at the same time and support functions of both flavors simultaneously

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It is also possible to install both function providers at the same time and support functions of both flavors simultaneously.
```

##### Pros

- Installation is the easiest to implement.
- Users can compare both functions providers.
- Gives a way to play around with the new functions provider while relying on Kubeless functions provider for production workload.

##### Cons

- Both providers use system resources.
- UI has to be able to cope with both function providers at the same time(probably hardest version to implement)

#### Recommendation

To install both functions providers into the same cluster and allow the user to use both providers at will.

## Monitoring and Alerting

Currently existing dashboards must be adapted to support the new knative-functions. Existing alert rules have to be adapted as well.

## Migration

> 1. Integrate the knative function controller.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Integrate the Knative function controller.
```

2. Install both runtimes simultaneously (installation of `function-controller` is triggered using a feature flag).
   - In this phase the user can run functions on kubeless with UI integration.

>    - `knative-functions` can be created using the `kubectl`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   - `knative-functions` can be created using the kubectl.
```

3. When the UI for `knative-functions` is released it will be enabled by the feature flag.
   - The user can now use the UI to schedule knative functions.
   - Kubeless functions can still be scheduled using the old UI
4. All other parts (alerting, monitoring, upgrade) will be enabled as soon as they are available
5. Once `knative-functions` is production ready the upgrade job will migrate all existing kubeless function to `knative-functions`.

## Next Steps

- Implement the required UI and GraphQL changes.
- Create `function-controller` module for kyma installer.
- Implement a migration job.

## Additional Thoughts

- It might be necessary to run multiple function controllers in the same cluster that reconcile the same CRD. (e.g. one that schedules the function locally, one that schedules it in a different cluster). The `Function` CRD should support this.

## Open Issues

The following is a list of open issues that need to be further addressed

> 1. Creation of ServiceAccounts to push docker images required or tekton.

Reviewer: Tekton creates docker images and pushes to docker registry. In order to be able to push to docker registry it needs credentials. These are coming via service account.
